---
layout: post
title: Which MBA
authors: George Bickerstaffe

---

- **Book Title**: Which MBA? A Critical guide to the world's Best MBAs
- **Author**: Michael Bickerstaffe
- **Year written/published**: 2000
- **Summary**: This book basically talks clearly about the curriculum of MBA, schools, the types of jobs after an MBA and also the admission criteria.
- **My Comments**: Although this book is a 7 year old version, it gave me insights into the main MBA curriculum and the programmes offered. I would recommended the latest versions if you are applying this/next year.
- **Some extracts**:

Why did you decide to study for an MBA?... some top reasons...

1. To open new career opportunities
2. Personal Developement
3. To increase Salary
4. To further Career
5. Educational Experience
6. Potential to netowrk
7. Recommendation
8. Company advice or requirement

Who recruits MBAs? Some Principal recruiters of MBA Graduates

- McKinsley
- Deloitte and Touche
- PricewaterhouseCoopers
- KPMG
- Andersen Consulting
- Ernt & Young
- Goldman Sachs
- IBM Consulting

is it worth it?

> Many MBA graduates find well-apid jobs and go on to scale an impressive career ladder. As the results of our poll of the world's leading companies show, just over 1/5 of their CEOs have an MBS, althought vast majorty of their peers have succeeded without one.In North America, 39% of the CEOS have an MBA, but in Asia and Australasia none of the CEOS have one.

the core curriculum...

- Finance
- Financial and Managerial accountancy
- Human Resource Management
- Information Management
- Macroeconomics and Microeconomics
- Marketing
- Organisational behaviours
- Quantitative analysis

how did you choose the school where you were taking MBA?

1. reputation
2. programme content
3. location
4. quality of faculty
5. ranking
6. recommendation
7. teaching methods
8. tuition, living cost
9. salary of graduates
10. career services

Some average GMAT Scores...

1. Stanford: 725
2. Columbia: 700
3. Kellogg: 700
4. Wharton: 691
5. Anderson: 690
6. Chicago: 690
7. MIT Sloan: 690
8. Stern: 686
9. INSEAD: 685
10. Tuck: 682
11. Cornell: 680
12. London: 680
13. Yale: 680
