---
layout: post
title: NLP Coach
authors: McCermott and Jago
categories:
- Books
---


- **Book Title**: The NLP Coach - A comprehensive guide to personal well-being and professional success
- **Authors**:Ian McDermott & Wendy Jago
- **Year written/published**: 2001
- **Some extracts**:

Some of the pioneers in NLP...

1. Richard Bandler
2. John Grindler
3. Fritz Perls
4. Virginia Satir
5. Milton Erickson
6. Robert Dilts
7. Judith Delozier

Tools for the job...

1. **Anchor **- any stimulus that changes your state
2. **Association and Dissociation**- If you are associated you are into the experience and experiencing it in full. If you are dissociated at any given moment, you are dissociated from the experience and experiencing it at one remove, possibly seeing yourself from a distance.
3. **Behavioral Flexibility** - is about having a range of ways to respond or to do something.
4. **Chunking** - is the process of grouping items of information into larger and smaller units.
5. **Compelling Future**- is a representation of a future state or experience which is so well realised and powerful that it has a compelling effect on you in the present. Many high achievers in sport and business have a really vivid idea in their minds of what it is they want to achieve.
6. **Contrastive Analysis**- is the process of comparing and contrasting 2 things which have some elements in common, but which have different outcomes.
7. **Criteria and Criterial Equivalences**
8. **Disney Creativity Strategy** - is a strategy for developing your dreams and giving them the best possible chance of becoming reality. It's named after Disney who often took on 3 distinct roles when his team was developing an idea : the dreamer, the realist, the critic.
9. **Ecology Check** - the process of considering what effects a course of action may have before you actually do it.
10. **Eye-Accessing Cues** Looking up and their right - imagining something visually Looking horizontally and to their right - imagining how something will sound Looking down and to their right - getting in touch with feelings Looking up and to their left - remembering visually Looking down and to their left - talking to oneself internally
11. **Framing **- The frame highlights certain qualities of the picture as it sets boundaries of the image. eg. Problem frame, outcome frame, as-if frame
12. **Logical Levels** - are a way of identifying underlying structures and patterns in thinking about ideas, events, relationships or organisations.
13. **Meta Model**- shows how in order to make sense of our experience and the information coming to us, we tend to simplify it in 3 ways: deletion, generalisation and distortion
14. **Meta Programmes**- are largely unconscious patterns of sorting information which are hugely influential because they affect what you notice, how you form your internal representations, and how you organise your experience and make information from it.
15. **Modelling **-
16. **Outcome Orientation**
17. **Pacing and Leading**
18. **Taking different perceptual positions**
19. **Rapport**
20. **Reframing**
21. **Representational Systems**
22. **Sensor Acuity**
23. **States**
24. **Sub-modalities** 5 senses - seeing (V), hearing (A), feeling (K), Smell (O), Taste (G)

some common failure patterns...

- being afraid of the unknown
- spending a lot of time with people who just use a problem frame
- presuming change is hard work
- having unrealistic time frames for change
- believing what you want can't happen.
- Always doubting your own competence
- Taking 'No' for an answer
- becoming cynical
- keeping yourself under constant pressure
- not letting yourself dream

people with true self-esteem, however famous they are, usually exhibit very different behaviours...

1. they have quiet confidence
2. they don't fish for compliments
3. they may be quite humble
4. they recognise and are often interested in other people and their achievements
5. they may not be bothered about receiving external recognition
