---
layout: post
title: 8th Habit
authors: Stephen Covey
categories:
- Books
---

- **Book Title**: The 8th Habit - From Effectiveness to Greatness
- **Author**: Stephen R. Covey
- **Year written/published**: 2004
- **Some extracts:**

about choices...

> Between stimulus and response there is a space. In that space lies our freedom and power to choose our response. In these choices lie our growth and our happiness.

About people who are celebrity obsessed...

> People who are star-struck (celebrity obsessed) are an example of those whose values may not be anchored in principles. Popularity shapes their moral center. They don't know who they are and don't know which way 'north' is. They don't know what principles to follow because their lives are based on social values. They are torn between social awareness and self-awareness on the one hand and natural laws and principles on the other.

on visions...

> Albert Einstein said, "Imagination is more important than knowledge". Memory is past. It is finite. Vision is future. It is infinite. Vision is greater than history, greater than baggage, greater than the emotions of the past. When somebody asked Einstein what question he would ask God if he could ask one, he replied, "How did the universe? Because everything after that is just maths". And after thinking for a while, he changed his mind. He said, "Instead I would ask, "Why was the universe created?" Because then I would know the meaning of my own life."

some representations... an end being accomplished through as unprincipled or unworthy means...

- Wealth without work
- Pleasure without conscience
- Knowledge without character
- Commerce without morality
- Science without humanity
- Worship without sacrifice
- Politics without Principle

7 levels of initiative or self-empowerment

1. Wait until told
2. Ask
3. Make a recommendation
4. I intend to
5. Do it and report immediately
6. Do it and report periodically
7. Do it!

5 cancerous behaviours!

1. Criticizing
2. Complaining
3. Comparing
4. Competing
5. Contending

productivity pyramid...

1. plan daily
2. plan weekly
3. set goals
4. identify mission and values

Listening Continuum...

1. Ignoring
2. Pretend Listening
3. Selective Listening
4. Attentive Listening
5. Empathic Listening

4 roles of leadership

1. Modeling (conscience): Set a good example
2. Pathfinding (vision): Jointly determine the course
3. Aligning (discipline): Set up and manage systems to stay on course
4. Empowering (passion): Focus talent on results, not methods
