---
layout: post
title: Core CSS
authors: keith Schengili-Roberts

---

- **Book Title:** Core CSS Cascading Style Sheets
- **Author:** Keith Schengili-Roberts
- **Year written/published:** 2004
- **My Comment**: This is an advanced book on CSS and much of the syntax here was something i have never seen before. It was a great book nevertheless... good to pick it up after a basic CSS book.
- **Contents page:**

1. Birth of CSS
2. XHTML and its relationship to CSS
3. Browser adoption of CSS
4. Implementation of Basic CSS concepts
5. The Cascade
6. CSS Units
7. Pseudo-Class and Pseudo-Elements
8. Media Types and Media Queries
9. Font properties
10. Text Properties
11. text Properties extensions
12. Box Properties
13. Color
14. background Properties
15. Classification and generated/Automatic Content
16. Visual Formatting and detailed Visual
17. Visual Effects
18. Paged Media
19. Tables
20. user Interface
21. Aural Cascading Style Sheets
22. RUby
23. Multi Column Layout
24. Scrollbars
25. Filters and Transitions

W3C introduces CSS...

> Tim Berners-Lee created the Web at CERN and the initial standard for HTML 1.0 and HTML 2.0 were governed by them. But CERN's main focus is particle physics research and not the web, and so in 1994 CERN abdicated its role as the standard-setting body for HTML. It passed the torch to a newly created body called the World Wide Web consortium, better known as W3C. The W3C convinced many major software companies including Netscape Communications, Microsoft, IBM, Novell, Sun Microsystems and many more to become part of this standards body.

`<span>` and `<div>`

> The `<span>` element is designed to temporarily override any existing CSS information that may have already been specified, and is meant to be used as an inline element. The <div> element works in the same manner, but is supposed to be applied to block-level elements.

attribute selectors

> `element[attribute]` - matches the names of the attribute contained within the brackets element[attribute="value"] - a match is made when the attribute equals the value of 'value' element[attribute~="value"] - a match is amde when the attribute roughly matches the valu of the "value", in cases where the text "value" may be part of a larger word element[attribute|="value"] - a match is made whenever the attribute matches the first few letters of a value whose first few letter match the text "value"
