---
layout: post
title: Paris 2006
authors: Rick Steves

---

- **Book Title:** Paris 2006
- **Author:** Rick Steves
- **Year written/published:** 2006
- **Book Source:** [Google Books](http://books.google.com/books?id=mbC5GwAACAAJ&dq=Paris+2006+rick), [Library](http://vistaweb.nlb.gov.sg/cgi-bin/cw_cgi?fullRecord+24956+3002+9277925+3+2)
- **Summary:** Travel guide to Paris
- **My Comments:** Rick Steves’ books are always very informative and practical… how to see Paris like a true local with little cost! I could vividly imagine the well-described walks
- **Some extracts:**

About travel…

> Travel is intensified living – maximum thrills per minute and one of the last great sources of legal adventure. Travel is freedom. It’s recess, and we need it. … … Affordable travel is a matter of priorities. You can travel – simply, safely and comfortably – nearly anywhere in Europe for 100 dollars a day, plus transportation costs. In many ways, spending more money only builds a thicker wall between you and what you came to see. … … Globe-trotting destroys ethnocentricity. It helps you understand and appreciate different culture. … … Travel changes people. It broadens perspectives and teaches new ways to measure quality of life.

Paris in days plan…

- Day1 morning: historic Walk featuring Ile de la Cite, Notre-Dame, Latin Quarter and Sainte Chapelle. Afternoon: Tour the Louvre Evening: Cruise the Seine river
- Day2 morning: Champs-Elysees Walk from Arc de Triomphe down the grande avenue des Champs-Elysees to Tuileries Garden. Midday: Orsay Museum Afternoon: Rodin Museum or Napolean’s Tomb or Versailles Night: Trcocadero scene and a twilight ride up the Eiffel Tower

Getting around Paris:

> The Metro, RER and buses all work on same tickets – Public-Transit Ticket. A carnet of 10 tickets cost around 10.70 Euro.

Key bus routes for tourists: Bus 69, 87, 24, 63 Paris at a glance:

- Louvre
- Orsay
- Eiffel Tower
- Arc de Trimphe
- Sainte Chapelle
- Versailles
- Notre-Dame Catherdral
- Scare-Coer
- Pompiduo Center
- Champs-Elysees

Bets views over the city of light:

1. Eiffel Tower
2. Arc De Trimphe
3. Le Grade Arche de la Defense
4. Notre-Dame’s Tower
5. Galeries Lafayette in Opera District (free)
6. Montparnasse Tower
7. Pompiduo Tower
8. Trocadero Square (free)

Paris Train Stations:

1. Gare St. Lazare
2. Gare du Nord
3. Gare L’est
4. Gare du Lyon
5. Gare d’Austerlitz
6. Gare Montparnasse
