---
layout: post
title: S.U.M.O
authors: Paul McGee
categories:
- Books
---


- **Book Title:** S.U.M.O (Shut Up, Move On) The Straight Talking guide to creating and enjoying a brilliant life
- **Author:** Paul McGee
- **Year written/published:** 2005
- **Book Source:** [Google Books](http://books.google.com/books?id=6R6XGAAACAAJ&dq=S.U.M.O+(Shut+Up,+Move+On)), [Library](http://vistaweb.nlb.gov.sg/cgi-bin/cw_cgi?fullRecord+7646+3002+12558135+1+2)
- **Summary:** Personal improvement for life
- **My Comments:** Short, succinct, frank!
- **Contents page:**

1. Change you T-Shirt
2. Develop Fruity Thinking
3. Hippo Time is OK
4. Remember the Beachball
5. Learn Latin
6. Ditch Doris Day

**Some extracts:**

some quotations…

- People tend to overestimate what they can achieve in a year, and underestimate what they can achieve in a lifetime ~Anthony Robbins
- At the end of the day do not be the kind of person who says I wish I had, I wish I had, I wish I had. Be the kind of person who says I’m glad I did, I’m glad I did, I’m glad I did. ~Zig Ziglar

Avoid Victim Language… replace with SUMO language…

1. Life is not fair – I am unhappy about that, what can I do?
2. This is just the way I am – How can I improve?
3. There’s nothing I can do – There’s always something I can do
4. It’s impossible – let’s find a way
5. Who is to blame? – How can we move forward?
6. I am a victim – I am a survivor

TEAR Thinking: Thinking -> Emotions -> Actions -> Results Fruity Thinking:

1. I am worth more because of who I am, not because of what I do
2. I learn from the past but I do not remain rooted in it. I know when to let go and when to move on.
3. I am responsible. I have choices. No one else plays as big a role in determining my destiny as I do.
4. I choose to major on the majors. I am aware of the big picture and focus on what is important. I see things in perspective.

top 3 tips for Hippo Times (times when you truly need a period for wallowing eg. death, loss of job, accident etc)

1. Be careful of who you talk to
2. Be careful how many people you talk to (to re-tell is to relive)
3. be careful how long your Hippo time lasts

Why do we procrastinate:
1. Avoiding discomfort
2. Emotional Barriers
3. fear of failure
4. complacency
5. Action illusion

Some questions for inner coaching:

1. Where is this issue on a scale of 1-10?
2. How important will this be in 6 months’ time?
3. Is my response appropriate and effective?
4. How can I Influence or improve the situation?
5. What can I learn from this?
6. What will I do differently next time?
7. What can I find that’s positive in this situation?
