---
layout: post
title:  "The Prince"
authors: Nicolo Machiavelli
tags: [21, 20]
---

**Reading Period**: 28 August 2016 - 9 September 2016

This book was interesting to give a glimpse into the age of feudalism and politics and control at that time - how timeless some principles are and yet some are not and why. I had difficult reading and comprehending old English though :) Will have to recommend some modern day write-up on this along with the original reading to aid understanding. I have also read this book in light of the current affairs in the world with rebels, wars and terrorism. I also can't help but draw analogies to modern democratic societies and how companies are led.

One man - 2 perceptions

> Machiavelli has painted Ferdinand of Aragon as the man who accomplished great things under the cloak of religion, but who in reality had no mercy, faith, humanity, or integrity; and who, had he allowed himself to be influenced by such motives, would have been ruined.

After acquiring rebel provinces

> It is very true that, after acquiring rebellious provinces a second time, **they are not so lightly lost afterwards**, because the prince, with little reluctance, takes the opportunity of the rebellion to punish the delinquents, to clear out the suspects, and to strengthen himself in the weakest places.

Shifting power to where it's needed

> But when states are acquired in a country differing in language, customs, or laws, there are difficulties, and good fortune and great energy are needed to hold them, and one of the greatest and most real helps would be that **he who has acquired them should go and reside there**.

Foreigner / immigration?

> The Romans were brought into Greece by the Aetolians; and in every other country where they obtained a footing they were brought in by the inhabitants. And the usual course of affairs is that, **as soon as a powerful foreigner enters a country**, all the subject states are drawn to him, moved by the hatred which they feel against the ruling power.

Why maintain friendly relations

> The Romans, in the countries which they annexed, observed closely these measures; they **sent colonies and maintained friendly relations with 1 the minor powers, without increasing their strength**; they kept down the greater, and did not allow any strong foreign powers to gain authority. Greece appears to me sufficient for an example.

Works with a young startup and big companies too...

> Because the Romans did in these instances what all prudent princes ought to do, who have to regard not only present troubles, but also future ones, for which they must prepare with every energy, because, when foreseen, it is easy to remedy them; but if you wait until they approach, the medicine is no longer in time because the malady has become incurable; for it happens in this, as the physicians say it happens in hectic fever, that **in the beginning of the malady it is easy to cure but difficult to detect**, but in the course of time, not having been either detected or treated in the beginning, **it becomes easy to detect but difficult to cure**.

Mistakes of power management

> Therefore Louis made these five errors: he destroyed the minor powers, he increased the strength of one of the greater powers in Italy, he brought in a foreign power, he did not settle in the country, he did not send colonies.

Drawing a parallel to acquisition of companies: Aqui-hire, grow it or autonomous

> WHENEVER THOSE STATES WHICH HAVE BEEN ACQUIRED AS STATED HAVE been accustomed to live under their own laws and in freedom, there are three courses for those who wish to hold them: **the first is to ruin them, the next is to reside there in person, the third is to permit them to live under their own laws**, drawing a tribute, and establishing within it an oligarchy which will keep it friendly to you.

Prince vs Republics

> But when cities or countries are accustomed to live under a prince, and his family is exterminated, they, being on the one hand accustomed to obey and on the other hand not having the old prince, cannot agree in making one from amongst themselves, and **they do not know how to govern themselves**. For this reason they are very slow to take up arms, and a prince can gain them to himself and secure them much more easily. But in republics there is more vitality, greater hatred, and more desire for vengeance, which will never permit them to allow the memory of their former liberty to rest; so that the **safest way is to destroy them or to reside there**.

Keeping order...

> If Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus had been unarmed **they could not have enforced their constitutions** for long—as happened in our time to Fra Girolamo Savonarola, who was ruined with his new order of things immediately the multitude believed in him no longer, and he had no means of keeping steadfast those who believed or of making the unbelievers to believe.

Lay the foundations first!

> Because, as is stated above, he who has not first laid his foundations may be able with great ability to lay them afterwards, but they will be laid with trouble to the architect and danger to the building.

People vs people in power

> Because in all cities these two distinct parties are found, and from this it arises that the **people do not wish to be ruled nor oppressed by the nobles**, and the **nobles wish to rule and oppress the people**; and from these two opposite desires there arises in cities one of three results, either a **principality, self-government, or anarchy**.

Favour vs real support

> **He who obtains sovereignty by the assistance of the nobles maintains himself with more difficulty than he who comes to it by the aid of the people**, because the former finds himself with many around him who consider themselves his equals, and because of this he can neither rule nor manage them to his liking. But **he who reaches sovereignty by popular favour finds himself alone**, and has none around him, or few, who are not prepared to obey him.

Check and balance: Defence capability and enforcing them

> The chief foundations of all states, new as well as old or composite, are **good laws and good arms**; and as there cannot be good laws where the state is not well armed, it follows that where they are well armed they have good laws.

Capable mercenaries - what an oxymoron for their use!

> The mercenary captains are either capable men or they are not; if they are, **you cannot trust them, because they always aspire to their own greatness**, either by oppressing you, who are their master, or others contrary to your intentions; but if the captain is not skilful, you are ruined in the usual way.

Sorry, the tech company CEO should be able to engineer when the time arises

> And if it be urged that whoever is armed will act in the same way, whether mercenary or not, I reply that when arms have to be resorted to, either by a prince or a republic, **then the prince ought to go in person and perform the duty of a captain**; the republic has to send its citizens, and when one is sent who does not turn out satisfactorily, it ought to recall him, and when one is worthy, to hold him by the laws so that he does not leave the command.

Must be founded on strength and hard skills

> And it has always been the opinion and judgment of wise men that **nothing can be so uncertain or unstable as fame or power not founded on its own strength**. And one's own forces are those which are composed either of subjects, citizens, or dependents; all others are mercenaries or auxiliaries.

When in peace prepare for war, when in war prepare for peace ~ Sun Tzu

> And therefore a prince who does not understand the art of war, over and above the other misfortunes already mentioned, cannot be respected by his soldiers, nor can he rely on them. He ought never, therefore, to have out of his thoughts this subject of war, and **in peace he should addict himself more to its exercise than in war**; this he can do in two ways, the one by action, the other by study.

Save and invest in rainy days

> A wise prince ought to observe some such rules, and **never in peaceful times stand idle**, but increase his resources with industry in such a way that they may be available to him in adversity, so that if fortune chances it may find him prepared to resist her blows.

Feared or loved?

> Upon this a question arises: whether it be better to be loved than feared or feared than loved? It may be answered that one should wish to be both, but, because it is difficult to unite them in one person, **it is much safer to be feared than loved**, when, of the two, either must be dispensed with.

Inspired, but never hated - done with honesty and no corruption

> Nevertheless **a prince ought to inspire fear in such a way that, if he does not win love, he avoids hatred**; because he can endure very well being feared whilst he is not hated, which will always be as long as he abstains from the property of his citizens and subjects and from their women.

Learn to choose your battles

> You must know there are **two ways of contesting, the one by the law, the other by force**; the first method is proper to men, the second to beasts; but because the first is frequently not sufficient, it is necessary to have recourse to the second. Therefore it is necessary for a prince to understand how to avail himself of the beast and the man.

Use different strategies

> A prince, therefore, being compelled knowingly to adopt the beast, ought to choose the fox and the lion; because the **lion cannot defend himself against snares and the fox cannot defend himself against wolves**. Therefore, it is necessary to be a fox to discover the snares and a lion to terrify the wolves. Those who rely simply on the lion do not understand what they are about.

Visibility of doing and qualities - but sincerely

> Therefore it is unnecessary for a prince to have all the good qualities I have enumerated, but **it is very necessary to appear to have them**. And I shall dare to say this also, that to have them and always to observe them is injurious, and that to appear to have them is useful; to appear merciful, faithful, humane, religious, upright, and to be so, but with a mind so framed that should you require not to be so, you may be able and know how to change to the opposite.

Nobles

> And well-ordered states and wise princes **have taken every care not to drive the nobles to desperation**, and to keep the people satisfied and contented, for this is one of the most important objects a prince can have.

Hire capable and wise people

> And the first opinion which one forms of a prince, and of his understanding, is by observing the men he has around him; and **when they are capable and faithful he may always be considered wise**, because he has known how to recognize the capable and to keep them faithful.

Types of smart people

> Because there are three classes of intellects: **one which comprehends by itself; another which appreciates what others comprehended**; and a third which neither comprehends by itself nor by the showing of others; the first is the most excellent, the second is good, the third is useless.

Recognizing subordinates

> although he himself may not have the initiative, yet he can recognize the good and the bad in his servant, and the one he can praise and the other correct; thus the servant cannot hope to deceive him, and is kept honest.

Working with servants / team / subordinates

> On the other hand, to keep his servant honest the prince ought to study him, **honouring him, enriching him, doing him kindnesses, sharing with him the honours and cares**; and at the same time let him see that he cannot stand alone, so that many honours may not make him desire more, many riches make him wish for more, and that many cares may make him dread chances.

Flattering

> Because there is no other way of **guarding oneself from flatterers except letting men understand that to tell you the truth does not offend you**; but when every one may tell you the truth, respect for you abates. Therefore a wise prince ought to hold a third course by choosing the wise men in his state, and giving to them only the liberty of speaking the truth to him, and then only of those things of which he inquires, and of none others; but **he ought to question them upon everything, and listen to their opinions, and afterwards form his own conclusions**.

Good times and bad times

> because in quiet times they never thought there could be a change (it is a common defect in man not to make any provision in the calm against the tempest), and when afterwards the bad times came they thought of flight and not of defending themselves, and they hoped that the people, disgusted with the insolence of the conquerors, would recall them.
