---
layout: post
title:  "The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement"
authors: Eliyahu M. Goldratt
---

# Three key measurements

1. **Throughput** is the rate at which the system generates money through sales (not production). If you produce something, but don’t sell it, it’s not throughput.
    - Cash flow in accounting
1. **Inventory** is all the money that the system has invested in purchasing things which it intends to sell.
    - Return on Investment in accounting
    - Investment
1. **Operational expense** is all the money the system spends in order to turn inventory into throughput.
    - Net profit in accounting

3 key accounting terms

> On the paper, I write down the three measurements which Lou and I agreed are central to knowing if the company is making money: **net profit, ROI and cash flow**.

Act on all 3 terms at the same time

> So this is the goal: To make money by increasing net profit, while simultaneously increasing return on investment, and simultaneously increasing cash flow.

3 key questions to guage the condition:

> He was using the measurements in the crude form of simple questions to see if his hunch about the robots was correct: **did we sell any more products** (i.e., did our throughput go up?); **did we lay off anybody** (did our operational expense go down?); and the last, exactly what he said: **did our inventories go down**?

How to manage the 3 measurements:

> that every company would want to have its **throughput go up**. Every company would also want the other two, **inventory and operational expense, to go down**, if at all possible.

Connecting the 3 terms to financial accounting

> each one of those definitions contains the word money,” he says. “Throughput is the money coming in. Inventory is the money currently inside the system. And operational expense is the money we have to pay out to make throughput happen. One measurement for the **incoming money**, one for the **money still stuck inside**, and one for the **money going out**.”

## Method

Science

> Science for me, and for the vast majority of respectable scientists, is not about the secrets of nature or even about truths. **Science is simply the method** we use to try and postulate a minimum set of assumptions that can explain, through a straightforward logical derivation, the existence of many phenomena of nature.

We cannot learn with the answers at hand

> I sincerely believe that the only way **we can learn is through our deductive process**. Presenting us with final conclusions is not a way that we learn.

What is productivity?

> I have come to the conclusion that **productivity is the act of bringing a company closer to its goal**. Every action that brings a company closer to its goal is productive. Every action that does not bring a company closer to its goal is not productive.

Seems like goals, but they are not goals

> Then I make a list of all the items people think of as being goals: cost-effective purchasing, employing good people, high technology, producing products, producing quality products, selling quality products, capturing market share. I even add some others like communications and customer satisfaction. All of those are essential to running the business successfully. What do they all do? They enable the company to make money. But they are not the goals themselves; **they’re just the means of achieving the goal**.

How inventory builds up

> “But, Stacey, you said the robots were producing a lot of parts for which we don’t have product orders,” I say. “That means we’re producing parts we don’t need.” “Everybody tells me we’ll use them eventually,”... Whenever efficiencies take a drop, everybody draws against the future forecast to keep busy. We build inventory.

Examples of operating expenses which might seem like investment

> “What about **lubricating oil for the machines**?” asks Bob. “It’s operational expense,” I tell him. “We’re not going to sell that oil to a customer.” “How about **scrap**?” he asks. “That’s operational expense, too.”



> If it’s knowledge, say, which gives us a new manufacturing process, something that helps turn inventory into throughput, then the knowledge is operational expense. If we intend to sell the knowledge, as in the case of a patent or a technology license, then it’s inventory.



> The problem is that everybody—including me until now—has thought these robots have been a big productivity improvement. And we just learned that they’re not productive in terms of the goal. The way we’ve been using them, they’re actually counter-productive.



> “Most of the time, your struggle for high efficiencies is taking you in the opposite direction of your goal.”



> “Do you realize that the only way you can create excess inventories is by having excess manpower?”



> “A balanced plant is essentially what every manufacturing manager in the whole western world has struggled to achieve. It’s a plant where the capacity of each and every resource is balanced exactly with demand from the market. Do



> The goal is not to improve one measurement in isolation. The goal is to reduce operational expense and reduce inventory while simultaneously increasing throughput,



> “For one thing, there is a mathematical proof which could clearly show that when capacity is trimmed exactly to marketing demands, no more and no less, throughput goes down, while inventory goes through the roof,”



> “But there are other kinds of information we cannot precisely predict. Like how long it will take the waiter to bring us our check. Or how long it will take the chef to make an omelet. Or how many eggs the kitchen will need today. These types of information vary from one instance to the next. They are subject to statistical fluctuations.



> “Most of the factors critical to running your plant successfully cannot be determined precisely ahead of time,”



> But you find dependent events in any process, and not just those in a factory. Driving a car requires a sequence of dependent events. So does the hike we’re taking now.



> So what’s wrong with that? Nothing as far as I can see. Anyway, we don’t have any choice. What else are we going to use in place of an “average” or an “estimate”?



> If we’re all walking at about the same pace, why is the distance between Ron, at the front of the line, and me, at the end of the line, increasing? Statistical fluctuations?



> The fluctuations should be averaging out. We’re all moving at about the same speed, so that should mean the distance between any of us will vary somewhat, but will even out over a period of time.



> It’s starting to make sense. Our hike is a set of dependent events . . . in combination with statistical fluctuations. Each of us is fluctuating in speed, faster and slower. But the ability to go faster than average is restricted.



> What’s happening isn’t an averaging out of the fluctuations in our various speeds, but an accumulation of the fluctuations. And mostly it’s an accumulation of slowness—because dependency limits the opportunities for higher fluctuations. And that’s why the line is spreading.



> Looking ahead, I can see that how much distance each of us has to make up tends to be a matter of where we are in the line.



> And here I am at the end of the line. To make the total length of the line contract, I have to move faster than average for a distance equal to all the excess space between all the boys. I have to make up for the accumulation of all their slowness.



> In the plant, we’ve definitely got both dependent events and statistical fluctuations.



> Each of us is like an operation which has to be performed to produce a product in the plant; each of us is one of a set of dependent events. Does it matter what order we’re in?



> I’m the last operation. Only after I have walked the trail is the product “sold,” so to speak. And that would have to be our throughput—not the rate at which Ron walks the trail, but the rate at which I do.



> What about the amount of trail between Ron and me? It has to be inventory. Ron is consuming raw materials, so the trail the rest of us are walking is inventory until it passes behind me.



> what is operational expense? It’s whatever lets us turn inventory into throughput, which in our case would be the energy the boys need to walk.



> If the distance between Ron and me is expanding, it can only mean that inventory is increasing. Throughput is my rate of walking. Which is influenced by the fluctuating rates of the others.



> Inventory is going up. Throughput is going down. And operational expense is probably increasing. Is that what’s happening in my plant? Yes, I think it is.



> “The idea is to move as many matches as you can from your bowl to the bowl on your right. When it’s your turn, you roll the die, and the number that comes up is the number of matches you can move. Got it?” They all nod. “But you can only move as many matches as you’ve got in your bowl. So if you roll a five and you only have two matches in your bowl, then you can only move two matches. And if it comes to your turn and you don’t have any matches, then naturally you can’t move any.” They nod again. “How many matches do you think we can move through the line each time we go through the cycle?” I ask them.



> The mound of matches in Dave’s bowl passes to Evan’s and onto the table finally—only to be replaced by another accumulating wave. And the system gets further and further behind schedule. “Want



> There was no reserve. When the kids downstream in the balanced model got behind, they had no extra capacity to make up for the loss. And as the negative deviations accumulated, they got deeper and deeper in the hole.



> It has to do with something called a covariance, the impact of one variable upon others in the same group. A mathematical principle says that in a linear dependency of two or more variables, the fluctuations of the variables down the line will fluctuate around the maximum deviation established by any preceding variables. That explains what happened in the balanced model. Fine,



> In fact, all the boys have arranged themselves (deliberately or accidentally, I’m not sure which) in an order that allows every one of them to walk without restriction. As I look up the line, I can’t see anybody who is being held back by anybody else. The order in which they’ve put themselves has placed the fastest kid at the front of the line, and the slowest at the back of the line.



> In fact, whoever is moving the slowest in the troop is the one who will govern throughput. And that person may not always be Herbie. Before lunch, Herbie was walking faster.



> Everybody stays together behind Herbie. I’ve gone to the back of the line so I can keep tabs, and I keep waiting for the gaps to appear, but they don’t. In the middle of the line I see someone pause to adjust his pack straps. But as soon as he starts again, we all walk just a little faster and we’re caught up. Nobody’s out of breath. What a difference!



> We’re flying now, doing twice the speed as a troop that we did before. And we still stay together. Inventory is down. Throughput is up. Devil’s



> I’ve always been reasonably adept at maintaining the outward illusion of control in the midst of chaos.



> Maybe I thought all I had to do was walk in and open my mouth to reveal my discoveries, and they’d all be instantly converted by the obvious rightness. But it doesn’t work that way.



> “It’s okay to say that fluctuations in cycle time for a robot would be almost flat while it was working,” I tell him. “But we’re not dealing just with a robotic operation. Our other operations do have both phenomena.



> “The maximum deviation of a preceding operation will become the starting point of a subsequent operation.” Bob



> “Longer lead times increase inventory, Bob. And that isn’t the goal.”



> we shouldn’t be looking at each local area and trying to trim it. We should be trying to optimize the whole system. Some resources have to have more capacity than others. The ones at the end of the line should have more than the ones at the beginning—sometimes a lot more.



> distinguish between two types of resources in your plant. One type is what I call a bottleneck resource. The other is, very simply, a non-bottleneck resource.



> “A bottleneck,” Jonah continues, “is any resource whose capacity is equal to or less than the demand placed upon it. And a non-bottleneck is any resource whose capacity is greater than the demand placed on it.



> you should not balance capacity with demand. What you need to do instead is balance the flow of product through the plant with demand from the market.



> So let me repeat it for you: Balance flow, not capacity.”



> “We adjust capacity so the bottleneck is at the front of production.”



> we’re now in the process of calculating the hours each “work center” has to contribute. We’re defining a work center as any group of the same resources. Ten welders with the same skills constitute a work center. Four identical machines constitute another. The four machinists who set up and run the machines are still another, and so on.



> found the demand for injection molding machines is about 260 hours a month for all the injection molded parts that they have to process. The available time for those machines is about 280 hours per month, per resource. So that means we still have reserve capacity on those machines.



> If we talk to the expeditors. They could probably tell us which parts they’re missing most of the time, and in which departments they usually go to look for them.” “What good is that going to do?” asks Ralph. “The parts most frequently in short supply are probably the ones that would pass through a bottleneck,



> “Yeah, but we got huge piles all over the place out there,” says Bob. “Then we find the biggest one,” I say.



> I thought the best thing to do would be to reorganize everything so the resource with the least capacity would be first in the routings. All other resources would have gradual increases in capacity to make up for the statistical fluctuations passed on through dependency.



> “Okay, if we can’t do anything to change their position in the sequence, then maybe we can increase their capacities. We’ll make them into non-bottlenecks.”



> “To increase the capacity of the plant is to increase the capacity of only the bottlenecks.” “You mean make them into non-bottlenecks,”



> “Excuse me, but you’re not actually suggesting we use that old equipment, are you?” “If it’s still operational, then yes, I might suggest it,” says Jonah.



> “The numbers are wrong, not because you have made a calculating error, but because the costs were determined as if these work centers existed in isolation,”



> But after a while I learned not to waste my time checking the numbers—because the numbers were almost always right. However, if I checked the assumptions, they were almost always wrong.”



> “What you have learned is that the capacity of the plant is equal to the capacity of its bottlenecks,”



> “If your bottlenecks are not working, you haven’t just lost $32 or $21. The true cost is the cost of an hour of the entire system. And that’s twenty seven hundred dollars.”



> how do we optimize the use of the bottlenecks? There are two principal themes



> “First, make sure the bottlenecks’ time is not wasted,”



> “Then make the bottlenecks work only on what will contribute to throughput today . . . not nine months from now,”



> think I’d wanna move the Q.C. inspection points first, to check parts going into the bottlenecks,”



> “Ralph, I want you to make us a list of all the overdue orders. Have them ranked in priority ranging from the most days overdue to the least days overdue.



> “You do understand how important it is for the expeditors not to interfere with this priority list, don’t you?” Stacey says, “Okay, but you have to promise me you won’t change it because of pressure from marketing.” “My word of honor,” I tell her.



> “They get set up and they start running one thing, and then they have to break in the middle so we can finish something else. It’s the same damn thing!”



> “But you can’t be everywhere, and this same kind of thing is going to happen again. So how do we communicate to everybody in the plant which parts are important?” “I guess we need some kind of system,” says Bob.



> let’s make sure that people at both of the bottlenecks know to keep working on the order with the highest priority number on the list.”



> You know we’ve always had to break up process runs for expediency to get orders shipped. The difference between then and now is that now we know to do it ahead of time, before the external pressure comes. We’ve got to have faith in what we know.”



> I decided that the more people who know about the bottlenecks and how important they are, the better off we’ll be.



> “The tag will be one of two colors: red or green. “A red marker means the work attached to it has first priority. The red tags go on any materials needing to be processed by a bottleneck. When a batch of parts with that color marker arrives at your work station, you are to work on them right away.”



> But what happens when you’ve got two batches of the same color? Each tag will have a number marked on it. You should always work on the materials with the lowest number.”



> After putting Q.C. in front of the bottlenecks, we discovered that about five percent of the parts going into the NCX-10 and about seven percent going into heat-treat did not conform to quality requirements.



> After parts exit the bottlenecks, they often tend to look almost identical to the parts going into the bottlenecks. Only a close examination by a trained eye will detect the difference in some cases. The problem is how to make it easy for the employee to tell the two apart



> “Let’s get a machinist and a helper and have them permanently stationed at the NCX-10. When it stops, they can get to work on it immediately.”



> “Knowing what we know now,” says Lou, “it’s perfectly legitimate for us to assign people to the bottlenecks if it will increase our throughput. We can certainly justify the cost if it increases sales—and thereby increases cash flow.



> “Sure,” I say. “Take people from the non-bottlenecks. By definition, they have excess capacity anyway.”



> To prevent it from seeming like a demotion to them, I make a point to go down there periodically on each of the shifts.



> There were piles and piles, and the piles kept growing. But some of the stocks have dwindled over the past couple of weeks of product assembly.



> So I relate all the history to him—putting Q.C. in front of the bottlenecks, training people to give special care to bottleneck parts, activating the three machines to supplement the NCX-10, the new lunch rules, assigning certain people to work only at the bottlenecks, increasing the batch sizes going into heat-treat, implementing the new priority system in the plant. . . .



> because if you resort to expediting now, you’ll have to expedite all the time, and the situation will only get worse.”



> the level of utilization of a non-bottleneck is not determined by its own potential, but by some other constraint in the system.”



> “When you make a non-bottleneck do more work than this machine, you are not increasing productivity. On the contrary, you are doing exactly the opposite. You are creating excess inventory, which is against the goal.”



> Putting it precisely, activating a resource and utilizing a resource are not synonymous.”



> “utilizing” a resource means making use of the resource in a way that moves the system toward the goal. “Activating” a resource is like pressing the ON switch of a machine; it runs whether or not there is any benefit to be derived from the work it’s doing.



> “A system of local optimums is not an optimum system at all; it is a very inefficient system.”



> (the bottlenecks) are going to tell us when to let more inventory into the system—except we’re going to use the aid of computers instead of drums and ropes.



> What you have to do is find a way to release the material for the red parts according to the rate at which the bottlenecks need material—and strictly at that rate.”



> If Ralph can determine a schedule for releasing red-tag materials based on the bottlenecks, he can also determine a schedule for final assembly. Once he knows when the bottleneck parts will reach final assembly, he can calculate backwards and determine the release of the non-bottleneck materials along each of their routes. In this way, the bottlenecks will be determining the release of all the materials in the plant. I



> “You know, that’s going to produce the same effect as moving the bottlenecks to the head of production, which is what I’d intended for us to do.”



> “Once the somebody is already on the payroll, it doesn’t cost us any more to have him be idle. Whether somebody produces parts or waits a few minutes doesn’t increase our operating expense. But excess inventory . . . now that ties up a lot of money.”



> as inventory is processed, the latest information can be fed directly into the plant data base. With the new system we’re beginning to see excellent results. Ralph did a little experimenting with the system and soon discovered we can predict within a day, more or less, when a shipment will leave the plant. Based on this, we’ve been able to put together a report to marketing listing all customer orders and dates when they will be shipped.



> By almost every standard, we’ve had a good month. Inventory levels have fallen and are continuing to fall rapidly. Withholding some materials has meant we’re no longer choking on work-in-process.



> Not today. I have a feeling if we go to him now, he’ll put on his hard nose and tell me to run the plant by the cost accounting methods he believes in.



> But what am I going to do after that? I’m going to be putting us into a huge hole in which we have nothing else to do. We need more business.



> I’m asking them because we’ve been living together for fifteen years and we have no clear understanding of what our marriage is supposed to do . . . or become . . . or anything!” I sputter. “We’re just coasting along, doing ‘what everyone else does.’ And



> Nobody ever asks ‘What is the goal of a marriage?’ People just get married because they’re in love.”



> “But to reap those benefits fully, we’d have to have our suppliers increase the frequency of deliveries to us and reduce the quantity of each delivery. That’s going to take some negotiating through purchasing, and I’m not sure all the vendors will go for it.”



> If you consider the total time from the moment the material comes into the plant to the minute it goes out the door as part of a finished product, you can divide that time into four elements. One of them is setup, the time the part spends waiting for a resource, while the resource is preparing itself to work on the part. Another is process time, which is the amount of time the part spends being modified into a new, more valuable form. A third element is queue time, which is the time the part spends in line for a resource while the resource is busy working on something else ahead of it. The fourth element is wait time, which is the time the part waits, not for a resource, but for another part so they can be assembled together.



> setup and process are a small portion of the total elapsed time for any part. But queue and wait often consume large amounts of time—in fact, the majority of the elapsed total that the part spends inside the plant.



> Saving setups at a non-bottleneck doesn’t make the system one bit more productive. The time and money saved is an illusion. Even if we double the number of setups, it won’t consume all the idle time.” “Okay,



> Since we cut batch sizes, work is flowing through the plant more smoothly than ever.



> Instead of people hanging around with nothing to do for a couple of hours, now they’ll have maybe a few tento twenty-minute waits



> We could re-schedule some of those in the priority system so they’d ship when promised instead of early.



> I’m beaming. “Thanks Johnny. But, as it turned out, Burnside’s order didn’t take any extra effort at all.”



> we’re supposed to balance capacity with demand first, then try to maintain the flow,”



> The rule we should be following is to balance the flow with demand, not the capacity.



> For any resource that is not a bottleneck, the level of activity from which the system is able to profit is not determined by its individual potential but by some other constraint within the system.



> “Alex,” he says in a stern voice, “as you climb up the ladder and your responsibilities grow, you should learn to rely more and more on yourself. Asking me to come now will lead to the opposite; it will increase the dependency.” I



> We need financial measurements for sure—but we don’t need them for their own sake. We need them for two different reasons. One is control; knowing to what extent a company is achieving its goal of making money. The other reason is probably even more important; measurements should induce the parts to do what’s good for the organization as a whole.



> “Financial numbers only reveal a small fraction of the picture. You have to find out what the people think is going on. What do they see as problems? Where do we stand vis-a-vis the clients?”



> Deciding that the company is wasting too much money on duplicated efforts and thus moving to a more centralized mode. Ten years later, we want to encourage entrepreneurship and we move back to decentralization. Almost every big company is oscillating, every five to ten years from centralization to decentralization, and then back again.”



> “If Mendeleev had stopped here, I would accept your criticism, but he took it a step further. He didn’t arrange the elements in a line. He had noticed that each seventh soldier represents basically the same chemical behavior, though with increased intensity. Thus he organized the elements in a table with seven columns.



> His classification gave him the ability to predict their weight and other properties. You must agree that’s a real achievement.”



> It took some years, but while he was still alive all the elements that Mendeleev predicted were found. The last of the elements that he ‘invented’ was found sixteen years later.



> “Mendeleev definitely revealed an intrinsic order. He didn’t reveal the reason for that order, that had to wait for another fifty years, when the internal structure of the atoms was found, but he definitely revealed the intrinsic order.



> the important thing is that we, in our plant, have switched to regard throughput as the most important measurement.



> “The entire bottleneck concept is not geared to decrease operating expense, it’s focused on increasing throughput.”



> Our new scale is different. Throughput is most important, then inventory—due to its impact on throughput and only then, at the tail, comes operating expenses.



> “Throughput and inventory had changed by several tens of percent while operating expenses went down by less than two percent.”



> STEP 1. Identify the system’s bottlenecks.



> STEP 2. Decide how to exploit the bottlenecks.



> STEP 3. Subordinate everything else to the above decision.



> STEP 4. Elevate the system’s bottlenecks.



> STEP 5. If, in a previous step, a bottleneck has been broken go back to step 1.



> Is there any doubt that we must subordinate the non-constraints to the constraints?



> “Shipping three weeks earlier is a clear indication that the constraint is no longer in production but in the market. Lack of sufficient orders limited the plant from making more money.”



> 1. IDENTIFY the system’s constraint(s). 2. Decide how to EXPLOIT the system’s constraint(s). 3. SUBORDINATE everything else to the above decision. 4. ELEVATE the system’s constraint(s). 5. WARNING!!!! If in the previous steps a constraint has been broken, go back to step 1, but do not allow INERTIA to cause a system’s constraint.



> “Whenever the constraint is broken it changes conditions to the extent that it is very dangerous to extrapolate from the past.” “As a matter of fact,” Stacey adds, “even the things that we put in place in order to elevate the constraint must be reexamined.” “How



> what stopped us from once again taking another jump on the bottom line? Nothing, except for the conviction that we don’t have enough capacity. Well, now we know differently. Now we know that we have a lot of spare capacity.”



> Somewhere in the scientific method lies the answer for the needed management techniques.



> “As long as we don’t know what caused the situation, the best we can do is to throw punches in all directions. That was our old mode of operation. I had hoped that we learned better.”



> “It’s a trade-off. The more inventory we allow before the bottleneck, the more time is available for upstream resources to catch up, and so, on average, they need less spare capacity. The more inventory the less spare capacity and vice versa.”



> We took more orders, which by themselves didn’t turn any resource into a new bottleneck, but they did drastically reduce the amount of spare capacity on the non-bottlenecks, and we didn’t compensate with increased inventory in front of the bottleneck.”



> The point is that throughput will be down, operating expense will be up and increasing the buffers means that inventory will be up. Everything is moving in the opposite direction of what it should.”



> Our ability to see what’s in front of us resembles that of moles. We’re reacting rather than planning.”



> If any organization was built for a purpose and any organization is composed of more than one person, then we must conclude that the purpose of the organization requires the synchronized efforts of more than one person.” “That



> “If synchronized efforts are required and the contribution of one link is strongly dependent on the performance of the other links, we cannot ignore the fact that organizations are not just a pile of different links, they should be regarded as chains.”



> “What are we asking for? For the ability to answer three simple questions: ‘what to change?’, ‘what to change to?’, and ‘how to cause the change?’ Basically what we are asking for is the most fundamental abilities one would expect from a manager.



> There is an explanation to these companies’ failure to implement Lean; an explanation that is apparent to any objective observer of a company like Hitachi Tool Engineering. The failure is due to the fundamental difference in the production environments. When Taiichi Ohno developed TPS, he didn’t do it in the abstract; he developed it for his company. It is no wonder that the powerful application that Ohno developed might not work in fundamentally different production environments.



> The manufacturing industry has been shaped by two great thinkers, Henry Ford and Taiichi Ohno. Ford revolutionized mass production by introducing the flow lines. Ohno took Ford’s ideas to the next level in his TPS, a system that forced the entire industry to change its grasp of inventory from an asset to a liability. Ford’s



> Flow means that inventories in the operation are moving. When inventory is not moving, inventory accumulates. Accumulation of inventory takes up space. Therefore, an intuitive way to achieve better flow is to limit the space allowed for inventory to accumulate.



> Therefore, in order to achieve flow, Ford had to abolish local efficiencies. In other words, flow lines are flying in the face of conventional wisdom; the convention that, to be effective, every worker and every work center have to be busy 100% of the time.



> But, there is another effect that stems from restricting the accumulation of inventory. It makes it very visible to spot the real problems that jeopardize the flow—when one work center in a line stops producing for more than a short while, soon the whole line stops.



> In summary, Ford’s flow lines are based on the following four concepts: 1. Improving flow (or equivalently lead time) is a primary objective of operations. 2. This primary objective should be translated into a practical mechanism that guides the operation when not to produce (prevents overproduction). 3. Local efficiencies must be abolished. 4. A focusing process to balance flow must be in place.



> He realized that both supermarkets and the feeding lines at Toyota needed to manage a large variety of products. In the supermarkets, products were not jam packing the aisles, rather most merchandise was held in the backroom storage. In the store itself, each product was allocated a limited shelf space. Only after a product was taken by a shopper, was replenishment from the backroom storage triggered to refill that product’s allotted shelf space.



> This is the notification to that work center that a container was withdrawn, that the allotted inventory is not full. Only in that case is the preceding work center allowed to produce



> Adhering to the flow concept mandates the abolishment of local efficiencies.



> This emphasis is probably the reason that outside Toyota TPS first became known as Just-in-time production.



> There are many rocks at the bottom of the river and it takes time and effort to remove them. The question is which rocks are important to remove. The answer is given by reducing the water level; those rocks which emerge above the water are the ones that should be removed.



> Ohno had to start with many containers each holding a non-negligible quantity of a particular part. Gradually, Ohno reduced the number of containers and then the quantities in each container. If the flow was not noticeably disturbed, then the reduction of the number of containers and quantities per container continued.



> When the flow was disturbed the Five Why’s method was used to pinpoint the root cause. It had to be fixed before the quantities could be further reduced. It took time but the end result was a remarkable improvement in productivity.



> Ohno did not invest so much effort in reducing the setup times in order to gain some cost savings.



> Ohno did not try to reduce the number of defective parts in order to save some (trivial) costs;



> Ohno did not even try to squeeze better prices from Toyota suppliers or to cut the payroll



> One of the ramifications of concentrating on cost reduction is that almost all initiatives to foster a process of on-going improvement quickly reach a point of diminishing returns and as a result many deteriorate to lip service.



> both Ford and Ohno followed four concepts (from now on we’ll refer to them as the concepts of flow): 1. Improving flow (or equivalently lead time) is a primary objective of operations. 2. This primary objective should be translated into a practical mechanism that guides the operation when not to produce (prevents over production). Ford used space; Ohno used inventory. 3. Local efficiencies must be abolished. 4. A focusing process to balance flow must be in place. Ford used direct observation. Ohno used the gradual reduction of the number of containers and then gradual reduction of parts per container.



> Since the Kanban system takes time to implement, its assumption is that the environment is relatively stable—that the processes and the products do not change significantly for a considerable length of time. Toyota enjoys a relatively stable environment. The car industry allows changes only once a year (a model year change) and usually, from one year to another, the vast majority of the components are the same.



> For example, in major sections of the electronics industry, the life span of most products is shorter than six months. To some extent, instability of products and processes exists in most other industries.



> They have demonstrated it in stable environments but what is the impact of improved flow on relatively unstable environments?



> When the products’ life is short, overproduction can become obsolescence.



> We now realize that: • TPS is restricted to relatively stable environments, • Most environments suffer from instability, and • Relatively unstable environments have much more to gain from better flow than even stable environments.



> Using time as the base is not only more intuitive and, therefore, more easily accepted by the shop floor, it has an advantage that makes it suitable for unstable environments—it is much less sensitive to disruptions in flow.



> when a work center is down for more than a short while the succeeding work centers are almost immediately starved for work and the preceding work centers are “blocked” from working.



> the accumulated time consumed by starvation and blockage is more than the excess capacity of that work center, the throughput of the company is reduced.



> Taking time (rather than space or inventory) as the base for the mechanism to guide the operation when not to produce mandates that we should strive to release the corresponding material an appropriate short time, just-in-time, before the due date of the order.



> striving to constantly activate all resources all the time is not a recipe for effective operations. On the contrary, the exact opposite is true; to reach effective operations, local efficiencies must be abolished.



> A good starting point for improving flow will be to choose the time buffer to be equal to half the current lead time; such a choice will ensure that the company will find itself somewhere on the plateau of the graph.



> The lesson that Shewhart brought to manufacturing from Physics, and Deming made known worldwide, is that trying to be more accurate than the noise (in our case, trying to use sophisticated algorithms that consider every possible parameter in an environment of high variability) does not improve things but makes them worse



> A straightforward priority system emerges when we recognize that the time buffer, being half of the current lead time, is still much longer than the touch time



> The increased sales can easily cause the emergence of a real bottleneck. Ignoring the bottleneck’s limited capacity when giving due-date commitments to new orders will deteriorate the due-date performance and sales from disappointed clients will plummet.



> It is essential to strengthen the tie between sales and operations—that is the real challenge. A system must be put in place to ensure that every due-date commitment is given only according to the yet unallocated capacity of the bottleneck.



> The bottleneck becomes the ‘drum beat’ for the orders, the ‘time buffer’ translates due-dates into release dates and the action of choking the release becomes the ‘rope’ that ties the order to the release of work.



> Five Focusing Steps 1. IDENTIFY the system’s constraint. 2. Decide how to EXPLOIT the system’s constraint. 3. SUBORDINATE everything else to the above decisions. 4. ELEVATE the system’s constraint. 5. If in the previous steps a constraint has been broken Go back to step 1, but do not allow inertia to cause a system constraint.


